EDU-6837 Documentar mcp.azion.com (#1997)
aziontech/docs: src/content/docs/en/pages/devtools/mcp/mcp-how-it-works.mdx

---
title: How MCP Works
description: >-
  Understand the technical architecture behind Azion's Model Context Protocol and learn
  how to implement your own MCP server using modern technologies.
meta_tags: 'mcp, architecture, implementation, node.js, typescript, edge functions'
namespace: documentation_devtools_mcp_how_it_works
menu_namespace: mcpMenu
permalink: /documentation/devtools/mcp/how-it-works/
---

import Code from '~/components/Code/Code.astro'

The Azion MCP server operates as a bridge between AI assistants and the Azion Platform, providing secure access to documentation, tools, and resources through a standardized protocol.

---

## Technical Architecture

MCP implements a client-server model using Anthropic's Model Context Protocol. The architecture consists of three main components:

### Technology Stack

| Component | Technology | Purpose |
|------------|------------|-----------|
| **Runtime** | Node.js 20+ | JavaScript execution environment |
| **Language** | TypeScript | Static typing and safety |
| **Protocol** | MCP SDK | Anthropic protocol implementation |

> | **Hosting** | Edge Functions | Distributed execution on Azion |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Hosting** | Functions | Distributed execution on Azion |
```

| **Authentication** | Personal Token / OAuth | Secure access control |

### Communication Flow

```text
AI Assistant (Client)
    ↓ HTTP/WebSocket Connection

> MCP Server (Edge Function)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MCP Server (Function)
```

import { registerTools } from './core/tools';
import { registerResources } from './core/resources';
import { registerPrompts } from './core/prompts';

const server = new McpServer({
  name: 'my-mcp-server',
  version: '1.0.0'
});

// Register capabilities
registerTools(server);
registerResources(server);
registerPrompts(server);

// Start server
export default {
  async fetch(request: Request): Promise<Response> {
    return server.handleRequest(request);
  }
};`} />

### Authentication

The MCP server supports multiple authentication methods:

<Code lang="typescript" code={`// src/middlewares/auth.ts
export async function authenticate(request: Request): Promise<AuthResult> {
  const authHeader = request.headers.get('Authorization');
  
  if (!authHeader) {
    return { success: false, error: 'Token not provided' };
  }

  const token = authHeader.replace('Bearer ', '');

  // Verify Personal Token (format: azion + 35 chars)
  if (token.startsWith('azion') && token.length === 40) {
    return validatePersonalToken(token);
  }

  // Verify OAuth token via SSO
  return validateOAuthToken(token);
}`} />

---

## Deploying to Azion

> The MCP server can be deployed as an Edge Function on Azion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCP server can be deployed as a Function on Azion:
```

### Configuration

Create an `azion.config.ts` file in the project root:

<Code lang="typescript" code={`// azion.config.ts
import { defineConfig } from 'azion';

export default defineConfig({
  functions: {
    'mcp-server': {
      path: './src/index.ts',
      runtime: 'nodejs',
      environment: {
        OPENAI_API_KEY: '{{env.OPENAI_API_KEY}}'
      }
    }
  }

> });`} />

Reviewer: Usa como base essa estrutura aqui:
https://github.com/aziontech/mcp-server/blob/main/azion.config.ts#L20

O `OPENAI_API_KEY` deve se inicializado num arquivo `.env`:
```
OPENAI_API_KEY=key
```

<Code lang="typescript" code={`// src/core/services/docsService.ts
import { z } from 'zod';

const SearchSchema = z.object({
  query: z.string().min(1),
  docsAmount: z.number().min(1).max(20).default(5)
});

export async function searchDocumentation(args: unknown) {
  // Validate input
  const validated = SearchSchema.parse(args);
  
  // Search documents
  const response = await fetch('https://api.azion.com/docs/search', {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: {
      'Content-Type': 'application/json',
      'Authorization': 'Bearer ' + process.env.AZION_API_KEY
    },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      query: validated.query,
      limit: validated.docsAmount
    })
  });

  if (!response.ok) {
    throw new Error('Search failed: ' + response.statusText);
  }

  const results = await response.json();
  
  // Format response
  return {
    content: [{
      type: 'text',
      text: JSON.stringify(results, null, 2)
    }]
  };
}`} />

---

## Additional Resources

- [MCP Specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io) - Official protocol documentation
- [MCP SDK](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/typescript-sdk) - Official TypeScript SDK

> - [Azion MCP Repository](https://github.com/aziontech/azion-copilot-api) - Azion server source code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Azion MCP Repository](https://github.com/aziontech/mcp-server/
) - Azion server source code
```
